---
layout: post
title: "What Makes Rowers Fast?"
date: 2025-05-15
categories: [rowing, data-science, performance]
---

## Why This Project?

As a competitive rower, I’ve always been curious about what truly drives performance improvements on the ergometer. Is it purely the ability to generate higher wattage through muscular strength? Or perhaps optimizing heart efficiency through targeted heart rate training? This project aims to investigate these two primary factors deeply using data science techniques.

Specifically the project is structured around two main hypothesis:

1. Strength Training Impact: Engaging in compound exercises like squat variants, hex-bar deadlifts, and bent-over rows significantly increases overall strength. As rowers become stronger their ability to produce higher wattage should increase linearly, improving performance across sprints, steady-state sessions, and standardized tests like the 2k and 6k.

2. Heart Rate Training Effect: Consistently maintaining lower heart rates (140-150 bpm) during steady-state training sessions will enhance cardiovascular efficiency. This training adaptation should lead to reduced heart rates during high-intensity workouts, allowing rowers to maintain higher performance levels by preventing the sharp performance drops that accompany extremely high heart rates.


## The Data

To start, I collected data from rowing machines (ergometers or erg for short) used by our team during workouts. These machines track a bunch of variables: power output (watts), force curves, stroke rate, heart rate, and even sometimes lactic acid levels. I also collected times and split data (a split is defined as how long it takes you to complete 500 meters) over intervals to capture how performance changes over the course of a piece.

To enhance the accuracy and depth of my analysis, I reach out to several teammates and friends, asking them to perform specific rowing sessions: 500-meter sprint pieces and steady-state workouts. Immediately after each session, they reported their results to me in a structured format [watts, stroke rate, heart rate]. I then compiled this data into individual CSV files for each friend, ensuring that they are carefully organized (I didn't provide names as they preferred to remain anonymous). While each data set may not appear extensive, every data point was carefully recorded right after each workout, capturing genuine, real-time performance metrics. Furthermore, the concept 2 ergometers used during this experiment don't provide hundreds of rows of data; rather, they provide a limited amount of data in the form of overall averages across the workout.

All the raw data lives in my github repository: https://github.com/Berkeso1/Rowing-Performance

